The Project Gutenberg eBook of Keeping Down the Cost of Your
Woodwork, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Keeping Down the Cost of Your Woodwork

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: December 10, 2021 [eBook #66920]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KEEPING DOWN THE COST OF YOUR
WOODWORK ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

    1. Typographical errors and hyphenation inconsistencies were
       silently corrected.

    2. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,
       (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;
       (b) Smallcaps thus +CAPS+; and
       (c) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

                   *       *       *       *       *




                               Keeping
                           Down _the_ Cost
                              _of_ Your
                              Woodwork

    [Illustration: _The woodwork of your home is one of the most
               important parts of its very structure_]

                           Copyright, 1923
                   Curtis Companies Service Bureau
                            Clinton, Iowa


[Illustration:

              _To fireside happiness, to hours of ease
          Blest with that charm, the certainty to please._
                                               --Samuel Rogers]




                      Keeping Down the Cost of
                            Your Woodwork

 _The common problem, yours, mine, everyone’s, is not to fancy
 what were fair in life provided it could be--but finding
 first what may be, then find how to make it fair up to our
 means._--+BROWNING+

Not so many years ago, home-builders of good taste who wished to have
in their homes a background of beautiful woodwork with architectural
value found it almost impossible to obtain such woodwork except by
special order, at necessarily great cost. The Curtis Companies have
done much to change this--to make this one thing that is “fair in
life,” “fair up to our means.” The object of this booklet is to tell
you how it is possible for you now to obtain woodwork of excellent
design and guaranteed construction at lower cost than you could have
done a few years ago.

What is meant by “lower costs?” Curtis Woodwork is not the lowest
priced woodwork on the market, but it is the greatest value, dollar
for dollar. You may be able to buy, for less money, woodwork that
looks something like Curtis material. Cheaper material cannot, of
course, have the same quality as Curtis Woodwork all the way through.
We do not claim to make the _cheapest_ woodwork on the market, but
only the _best_. You will find that woodwork bearing the Curtis
trademark represents better value, rather than lower first cost.


                              +DESIGN+

The first element of its greater value, perhaps, is superior design.
Along with a higher standard of living in general, and education in
better homes and interior furnishing, there has come an increasing
demand for woodwork of better proportions and pattern than are
found in ordinary “stock millwork.” The Curtis Companies, led by
this demand, re-designed Curtis Woodwork to make it harmonize with
the newer furnishings. In this work, the authoritative help of the
architectural profession was sought. The present beautiful and
authentic designs of Curtis Woodwork are the work of Trowbridge &
Ackerman, architects, of New York City, who are acknowledged experts
in interior details of homes.

This quality of good design adds nothing to the cost, for it is just
as cheap to make a good design as a poor one, and often involves less
material rather than more, and simpler forms rather than more ornate
ones.

Your architect will not hesitate to recommend Curtis Woodwork for
your home, because it is correct in every detail, and will save him
and you the labor and expense and delay of specially designed items.

“But how,” you ask, “can Curtis Woodwork be beautiful and be well
made without increasing the cost?” Briefly, because it has been
standardized and is produced in quantities.


                          +STANDARDIZATION+

By standardization, we mean that production has been limited
to those designs, sizes and kinds of wood indicated in Curtis
literature. These are of sufficient number and variety to cover
all needs and all types of houses, but eliminate those sizes and
patterns not in demand. Thus waste is eliminated by not producing
and keeping in stock material that is little called for.

The woodwork items pictured in most “millwork” catalogs as _stock_
are seldom actually on hand; they are a collection of suggested
designs which have been detailed and which will be made up upon
receipt of your order. The items shown in the Curtis catalog,
“Architectural Interior and Exterior Woodwork, Standardized,” are
made up in quantities, and an effort is made to keep a supply on hand
ready for shipment upon receipt of your order.


                        +QUANTITY PRODUCTION+

These standardized items of Curtis Woodwork are produced in large
quantities. It is easily understood that a hundred sideboards, for
instance, can be produced at a much lower proportionate cost than a
single one. Accurate “details” must be prepared and if these can be
used again and again, a large factor in the cost of production is
eliminated. In making a sideboard, no less than 19 operations are
necessary. For these, intricate machines must be set and adjusted,
and material prepared. This can be done in practically the same time
for 100 to be run through as for 1, thus distributing the cost.


                           +CONSTRUCTION+

Wood is the only building material that grows. For that reason it is
seldom perfect and is more subject to the action of heat or moisture
than any other building material. It must be protected against damage
from these elements from the time the tree is felled--during the time
it is being made into woodwork in the factory, while in storage,
in transit, in the hands of your painter and finisher, and even
during the years that it is in your home. The construction of Curtis
Woodwork takes account of these factors and minimizes the chances of
your woodwork “going wrong” after it leaves our hands.

There is not space here to tell about the special construction
features which distinguish Curtis Woodwork from ordinary “millwork.”
Some of them are shown, however, on the following pages, in diagrams
showing details of Curtis stairs, cabinet work and doors.

Workmen making more than one piece of a kind at a time soon find
better ways of doing the work, and therefore make a product of better
quality. Many of the special Curtis construction features have been
worked out by the men in the Curtis factories because they were
interested in making Curtis Woodwork the best you can buy. If they
made each piece but once, the purchaser could not profit from their
experience.


                            +DELIVERIES+

Curtis Woodwork is made in quantities and kept in stock, not only by
the various Curtis factories, but by Curtis dealers throughout the
East and Middle West. With this wide distribution, your order can be
delivered promptly, so that your workmen need not be held up waiting
for your woodwork to be made at the mill.


                             +GUARANTEE+

Every piece of Curtis Woodwork that you buy carries, as a final
pledge of its better value, the guarantee: “The makers of Curtis
Woodwork guarantee complete satisfaction to its users. ‘We’re
not satisfied unless you are.’” If you believe with us that
economy does not refer to money hoarded, but to money _wisely_
spent, ask your lumber dealer to furnish Curtis Woodwork for your
house, and look for the Curtis trademark upon it.




                            Restful Rooms


Home is a place of rest. We seek for comfort in our homes. We mean
something more than bodily ease when we speak of comfort--we must
have _mental_ rest too. And there can be no mental rest without
beauty.

Beauty in the home is of two kinds, architectural and decorative.
They are supplementary, and neither can be successful without the
other. Rugs, lamps, furniture, pictures--these are decorative
elements. Much can be done with them to make a room homelike; but
to make a room truly restful it is necessary to have, also, good
architectural details to form a background or setting for the
decorative features. These architectural details are, in the main,
articles of woodwork.

Naturally, the best source of information on the design of interior
woodwork is the architectural profession. It was for that reason that
the Curtis Companies sought the help of Trowbridge & Ackerman, a firm
of architects nationally known for their work in interior details.
They re-designed the entire line of Curtis Woodwork, giving it the
benefit of their knowledge of design. The Curtis Companies give to it
their six decades’ experience in the construction of good woodwork.
By manufacturing it in quantities, the Curtis Companies are now
able to supply the builder with woodwork of architectural character
at less cost than made-to-order woodwork of indifferent design and
ordinary quality.

The use of standardized forms produced in quantities does not mean
in any sense the sacrifice of individuality, because there are many
designs from which to choose. Individuality, as one writer puts it,
is nothing more than “the best expression of one’s sense of beauty
and the fitness of things, and when it is guided by the laws of
harmony and proportion, the result is usually one of great charm,
convenience and comfort.”

On the following pages, each of the important rooms in the
average house is considered separately. These pages are commended
to your careful consideration, for you will find in them many
suggestions that will help you to build comfort, convenience and
beauty into your home--and this means restful rooms.




[Illustration]

                    Where First Impressions Count


The exterior of every house, however simple or elaborate, is nothing
more than a wall punctured with openings. If it is well proportioned,
and if the openings are well spaced and well proportioned, it will
create a favorable impression.

Windows having small panes with the division bars between them
painted white make interesting openings. Curtis sash are ovolo-molded
to match the molding of the doors and woodwork on the interior. Check
rails are rabbeted, and so resist seven times as much wind pressure
as ordinary check rails.

Blinds contribute color and contrast to the exterior of the house,
and they make the rooms within more restful because they enable you
to shut out the glaring sun without shutting out the breezes.

The construction of Curtis standard frames for windows and doors
reduces coal bills and makes more comfortable rooms.

[Illustration: _Entrance C-101_]

[Illustration: _Entrance C-109_

 _Good proportions, dignity, simplicity, are characteristic of all
 stock Curtis entrances, for large home or small one._]

[Illustration: _Entrance C-111_]

[Illustration: _Stair C-900_]

[Illustration:

 _Starting newels and balusters on Curtis stairs like C-900 are
 dowel-pinned to the solid, built-up starting tread. On stairs like
 C-913, the newel is tenoned to fit into a mortise in the tread. The
 result of such forms of construction is balustrades that are strong
 and stable._]

[Illustration: _Stair C-913_]

As the entrance is usually the focal center of the main elevation,
it should be selected with care and due regard to the type of home
in which it is to be used. There are more than thirty designs in the
Curtis catalog.

Strangers judge your home only by those things which are seen from
the outside. But you and your family have to live with the things
inside. While you are pleased by favorable comment on the beauty of
the exterior, you are thrilled with greater pleasure at admiration of
the restful rooms within.

First impressions of the interior are usually made by the hall.
In the two-story house the stair may make or mar these first
impressions. On account of its size, its utility, its construction
as a part of the house, and its possibilities for beauty, the
stairway is of both structural and architectural importance. Beauty
depends not upon large-sized members, but upon graceful lines, good
proportions and finely molded parts. In the entrance hall, French
doors also add to the favorable impression which your home makes.
They keep out sounds and drafts but do not shut out light between
rooms.

[Illustration:

 _A feature of Curtis stair construction which saves time for the
 carpenter is the “housing” of the wall stringers. The treads and
 risers, which are tongued-and-grooved together as shown above, on
 the right, are WEDGED into the housing, not nailed. This is the
 most satisfactory stair construction that has so far been devised
 to eliminate creaking and “giving.” This picture is taken from the
 under side of the stair._]

[Illustration: _Inter-Room Opening C-535_]

[Illustration:

 _Face stringers (top picture) are tenoned to fit into mortises in
 corner and angle newels, and are secured on the inside by means
 of cleats. Balusters (bottom pictures) are dovetailed to the
 treads, then the nosing and molding are applied._]




[Illustration]

               The Living Room That Deserves Its Name


With such Curtis Woodwork as mantels, bookcases, inter-room openings,
wall paneling and ceiling beams as a background for the living room,
its furnishing is greatly simplified and it is easy to make it a room
deserving of its name.

Don’t consider for a minute doing without a fireplace. The cheer it
brings to the family circle, especially at Christmas time, is in
itself quite worth its cost. A hearth fire takes the dampness out of
the atmosphere in early spring and late fall, when the furnace is
not going, and so saves coal bills. The fireplace is valuable as a
means of ventilation, too. It is the center of interest in the living
room, and should be dignified and beautiful. Many beautiful mantels
of architectural merit are shown in the Curtis catalog, for houses of
all types.

Bookcases in the living room and library combine both architectural
and decorative value to a greater degree, perhaps, than does any
other one detail. The decorative value of books can hardly be
overstated. Curtis bookcases are designed as an integral part of the
house. They may be had in various sizes to fit your needs. There
are some with beautifully fluted pilasters and others of plainer
design but fine proportions. Either type may be had with or without a
drawer-pedestal.

Sometimes bookcases are used in combination with a permanent seat,
as for example around a window, and the recess thus produced can
be made very alluring. Permanent seats also utilize many otherwise
unused corners and nooks. They have hinged tops and so can be
used for storing miscellaneous household articles.

[Illustration]

Paneling is an attractive wall treatment for many homes. The wall
may be entirely covered with well proportioned and carefully molded
wood panels, or it may be marked off into rectangles with a simple
molding--which is known as “French paneling.” Paneling may be used
in other rooms of the house also. Often it is accompanied by beamed
ceiling, but ceiling beams can also be used without paneling, if you
wish, and give character to a room. They can be used to modify the
proportions of the room. They lend an interest to the interior that
it might not otherwise have. The Curtis catalog shows wall panelings
and ceiling beams of various designs.

In a small house, the rooms can be given the appearance of greater
size if inter-room openings are used instead of doors. These wide
portals throw the rooms together and permit larger vistas. They may
have simple paneled buttresses, or they may contain bookcases, desks,
or cabinets that take up very little more floor space than would the
partition. In either case the newest and best Curtis designs have
columns extending all the way from floor to ceiling.

[Illustration:

 _In permanent furniture the tongue-and-groove mitred joint is used
 wherever practical. Note the differences between this construction
 and the common butt joint. With the former, no nails are used that
 mar the finished surface of the cabinet, and there is no incongruous
 contrast between edge and flat grain wood at the corners. Such a
 joint cannot open up as a result of humidity and temperature changes
 in the rooms._]

[Illustration:

 _The mortise-and-tenon joint is used in the face of cabinet work and
 in the stiles and rails of doors._]

[Illustration:

 _All but the smallest drawers in Curtis permanent furniture are made
 with dovetailed corners that cannot pull apart. They operate on
 slides (A), which prevent wobbling and binding. The laminated drawer
 bottoms are set into grooves in the sides and ends of the drawers.
 The bottoms cannot shift about._]




[Illustration]

                   Making the Dining Room Inviting


In no room of the well-planned home is there greater opportunity for
good taste in woodwork than in the dining room. The room itself may
be attractive before furniture or drapery or carpet has been put in
place.

There must be, of course, a sideboard or buffet or perhaps a corner
china closet or a pair of them, in which to keep the china and silver
and linens. All of these may be had in Curtis built-in furniture of
excellent design and proportions, decorative in themselves and as a
display of handsome table-ware. They may be built into a recess,
or set out into the room. They come in different woods, suitable
for the finish that will best harmonize with your other woodwork or
furniture. There is a wide variety of sizes and types.

[Illustration: _Sideboard C-710_]

[Illustration:

 “_Built-in furniture is very good in a small room,
 because it takes and keeps its place as a part of the wall and
 increases the floor space. It is advantageous in a room of great
 size, because it then becomes of architectural importance, and may be
 of great decorative value in mass and color._”
  --_The Honest House_]

[Illustration: _China Closet C-703_]

[Illustration: _Buffet C-717_]

[Illustration:

 _Curtis veneered doors have stiles and rails built-up as shown in
 the section above. “C” are blocks of California white pine which
 are tongued-and-grooved and glued together. They will not warp and
 they are light. “B” are strips of hardwood which form the edges of
 the stiles and rails and into which the molding is cut on Curtis
 ovolo-molded doors. “A” are strips of veneer which are secured to
 the white pine core by means of waterproof glue. Thus a door is
 produced with all the beauty of grain of hardwood, combined with
 the lightness, non-warping, non-checking characteristics of solid
 softwood doors._]

[Illustration: _Curtis Standard Trim C-1620_]

A fireplace here is less essential than in the living room, but if
you can include one, it contributes to the spirit of hospitality and
cheerfulness which should characterize the room. Choose for it, from
among the Curtis standard designs, a simpler mantel than that in the
living room.

In a large room, beamed ceiling and wall paneling are impressive.
In a dining room of any size, wainscoting is always appropriate and
effective, and when you consider how easy it is to clean, and the
fact that it never needs renewal, it is an economical wall treatment
as well.

One of the important things about the background of the dining
room--as of every other room in the house--is the choice of doors,
windows and trim. These you must have, and on account of their
number, they may do much to improve or to destroy the effect of the
whole interior scheme. If you choose Curtis doors--whether they be
veneered or solid, whether with raised panels or flat ones, whether
with delicate moldings or of Puritanical simplicity--you will have
doors of correct proportions and guaranteed construction. The same
is true of Curtis windows and casements. The trim around windows and
doors offers a splendid opportunity for a choice between molded or
plainer Curtis patterns.

[Illustration: _Interior Door C-300_]

[Illustration:

 _Above are shown the two different kinds and patterns of standard
 moldings on Curtis doors, the “ovolo” and the “flush”. The former
 is cut on the stile or rail; the latter is a separate piece that
 is applied, being nailed to a spline, not to the panel, with the
 result that when the panel shrinks the molding will not be pulled
 away from the stile or rail. Note the panel thicknesses, too. Solid
 raised panels are shown. In doors 1-3/4-inch thick these panels are
 1-1/8-inch thick, while on 1-3/8-inch thick doors the solid raised
 panels are 9/16-inch thick. The same depth of “reveal” is therefore
 presented in every door. Solid flat panels in 1-3/4-inch doors are
 7/16-inch thick; in 1-3/8-inch doors, 5/16-inch thick. Laminated or
 3-ply panels are always 5/16-inch thick._]

[Illustration: _Interior Door C-305_]




[Illustration: _Combination Kitchen Dresser and Worktable C-760_]

                     Lightening Kitchen Burdens


Much can be done toward lightening kitchen burdens by proper placing
of the furniture and equipment. The character and location of
dresser, worktable and ironing board must be carefully considered. In
the illustration above, one end of the kitchen is so arranged that
most of the work can be done there, within a few steps. Regardless
of the width of the kitchen, there are units of Curtis permanent
furniture for this room that can be employed to form a similar
arrangement. Some Curtis dressers are two doors wide, others three;
some have a top section extending clear to the ceiling; others do
not. Any cabinet can be supplied with either glass or panel doors in
C-718, shown here, the kitchen dresser is combined with the dining
room sideboard, with sliding doors between.

[Illustration: _Kitchen Worktable C-763 (at left)_

 _Hingeless, removable flour bins are used in Curtis kitchen
 dressers and worktables. They will not fall out. Beneath the
 front lower edge of worktables space is left for the toes of
 the person working at the table, enabling one to get up close
 without discomfort or scuffing the shoes._]

[Illustration: _Combination Sideboard_]

[Illustration: _and Kitchen Dresser C-718_]

[Illustration:

 _Sliding doors separate the countershelves in design
 C-718. The doors slide on rollers and are guided by a pin which
 operates in a groove in the bottom edge._]

There are several different types of worktables in the Curtis
catalog. One of them is shown in the large illustration on page
12; another is shown at the bottom of that page. Bins, drawers
and cabinets utilize the space beneath the table top. Like Curtis
dressers, they are made with “toe-room” for the convenience of the
worker. Perhaps a corner of your kitchen can be used for a dining
alcove, or a breakfast table that folds into a wall cabinet when not
in use, such as are shown on page 15.

There should be a built-in ironing board in every kitchen. It is
protected from dust, is completely out of the way and is always ready
for use. This board is as easily installed in an old home as it is in
a new house.

Any item of Curtis permanent furniture can be installed in a house
already built with practically as little trouble as in a new house.

Curtis permanent furniture in the kitchen does much to shorten the
working hours of the women of the household. It saves time, steps and
a great deal of hard work, leaving the housewife better able to enjoy
her family than when she is tired out from heavy kitchen burdens.

[Illustration:

 _Ironing Board C-770. Above you see the construction of the Curtis
 built-in ironing board, which makes it adjustable in height. At the
 extreme left is the board in place; at the immediate left, the board
 in use; at the right the board is shown sustaining a weight of 365
 pounds. The sturdy construction of the board and its leg makes a
 stable ironing board. The above construction is such that the board
 cannot shift endwise with the motion of the iron._]




[Illustration]

             Where You Spend Over One-third of Your Life


Did you ever stop to realize that you spend more than one-third of
your life in your bedroom? This, indeed, should be a restful room!
Curtis hanging closets, dressing tables, window seats, tray cases
afford compact, accessible places to put away personal belongings,
and economize floor space, making even a small bedroom spacious.
There are dressing tables of two sizes, both with adjustable side
mirrors and a fascinating little bench. The tray cases have sliding,
open-end trays of various sizes and are enclosed by one of the
regular interior doors, so that the room may always be neat. The
hanging closet includes shelf, hanger-rod and shoe rack, and has a
raised floor that makes it unusually easy to clean. The dressing
table, tray case and hanging closet may be used in any combination,
and may be installed in a house already built, if you wish.

Bedroom slat doors are invaluable, especially in warm weather, to
increase ventilation while maintaining strict privacy.

Near the bedrooms and bathroom, a Curtis linen case is indispensable.

[Illustration: _Bedroom Slat Door C-330_]

[Illustration: _Dressing Table C-810, with Hanging
Closet and Tray Case_]

[Illustration: _Linen Case C-813_]

[Illustration:

 _Dining Alcove C-740. If you are planning a small house, a dining
 alcove will save you the space of a larger dining room; or it can
 serve as the family dining room in the larger house, when it will
 save housework and make the serving of simple meals a great deal
 easier._]




                   Here and There About the House


Many an old house can be made more livable and many a new one insured
greater appreciation by adding one or two features here and there
that may perhaps not be necessities, but which will make the home
more beautiful, cheerful or convenient--make it more of a home. Such
things as a bay window, a dormer, a dining alcove, built-in tables,
radiator enclosures, hanging china closets, and medicine cabinets are
among these.

A bay window is a delightful addition to any room. It affords a view
up and down the street that an ordinary window does not allow, and
also takes advantage of sunlight and breezes from three directions.
A dormer may supply light and air for some unused space in the attic
and add interest to the roof lines.

Curtis radiator enclosures with iron grills solve a perplexing
problem in an attractive manner. A hanging china closet takes up no
floor space, and is more appropriate and decorative than a picture.

[Illustration: _Medicine Cabinet C-816_]

[Illustration: _Hanging China Closet C-731_

 _A built-in table (shown in the two middle pictures) is the very
 thing for the apartment kitchenette, because it affords a table for
 dining and so leaves the regular living room table undisturbed. A
 table such as this will also make an excellent supplementary work
 place in the larger kitchen._]

[Illustration: _Built-in Table C-741_]

[Illustration: _Radiator Enclosure C-819_]




                  How You Can Obtain Restful Rooms


Not long ago, the only way the builder of the small house could
obtain such things of beauty and comfort as those described on the
foregoing pages was to have his lumber dealer order them from his
manufacturer, made to the architect’s special details. This was a
very expensive process, so expensive, in fact, that as a result of
it architects’ services were largely slighted, and consequently,
builders obtained uninteresting, ill-proportioned woodwork that could
not possibly produce restful rooms.

The Curtis Companies have changed all this. Architectural authorities
have designed practically every item of Curtis Woodwork. You can
buy this architectural woodwork for what you would have to pay for
mediocre designs made-to-order.

Go to your dealer and ask him to show you his Curtis catalog. It will
give you specific information concerning sizes and other details.
Selecting your designs of woodwork from the Curtis catalog is one of
the safest steps you can take toward obtaining restful rooms. Look
for this trademark

                              +CURTIS+

It identifies every genuine piece of Curtis Woodwork. You will find
many imitations of Curtis designs and some that are claimed to be
just as good. But without this trademark you do not receive Curtis
quality--an intrinsic value that unites appearance, utility and
Curtis intent.


                  CURTIS COMPANIES SERVICE BUREAU
                            CLINTON, IOWA

_Representing the following manufacturing and distributing plants_:

      +CURTIS BROS. & CO+.                 +CLINTON, IOWA+
      +CURTIS & YALE CO.+                  +WAUSAU, WIS.+
      +CURTIS-YALE-HOLLAND CO.+            +MINNEAPOLIS, MINN.+
      +CURTIS SASH & DOOR CO.+             +SIOUX CITY, IOWA+
      +CURTIS, TOWLE & PAINE CO.+          +LINCOLN, NEB.+
      +CURTIS, TOWLE & PAINE CO.+          +TOPEKA, KANS.+
      +CURTIS DOOR & SASH CO.+             +CHICAGO, ILL.+
      +CURTIS DETROIT CO.+                 +DETROIT, MICH.+

      +CURTIS COMPANIES INCORPORATED+      +CLINTON, IOWA+


   _Sales offices of_ +CURTIS COMPANIES INCORPORATED+ _located in_
        +PITTSBURGH, PA.+ +NEW YORK, N. Y.+ +BALTIMORE, MD.+

                                Rogers & Company, Chicago and New York

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KEEPING DOWN THE COST OF YOUR
WOODWORK ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
